Why does this grief come upon me, poor wretch?
Whether he be the best of heroes now about to perish, or the worst, let him go to his doom.
Yet I would that he had escaped unharmed; yea, may this be so, revered goddess,
daughter of Perses, may he avoid death and return home;
but if it be his lot to be o'ermastered by the oxen, may he first learn this,
that I at least do not rejoice in his cruel calamity.
Poor wretch, how have gloomy dreams affrighted me!
I fear that this voyage of the heroes will bring some great evil.
My heart is trembling for the stranger.
Let him woo some Achaean girl far away among his own folk;
let maidenhood be mine and the home of my parents.
Yet, taking to myself a reckless heart, I will no more keep aloof but will make
trial of my sister to see if she will entreat me to aid in the contest,
through grief for her own sons; this would quench the bitter pain in my heart.
Chalciope, my heart is all trembling for thy sons,
lest my father forthwith destroy them together with the strangers.
Slumbering just now in a short-lived sleep such a ghastly dream did I see—
may some god forbid its fulfilment
and never mayst thou win for thyself bitter care on thy sons' account
God help thee, what healing can I bring thee for what thou speakest of,
horrible curses and Furies? Would that it were firmly in my power to save thy sons!
Be witness that mighty oath of the Colchians by which thou urgest me to swear,
the great Heaven, and Earth beneath, mother of the gods, that as far as strength lies in me,
never shalt thou fail of help,
if only thy prayers can be accomplished.
Chalciope, as is dear and delightful to thee and thy sons, even so will I do.
Never may the dawn appear again to my eyes, never mayst thou see me living any longer,
if I should take thought for anything before thy life or thy sons' lives,
for they are my brothers, my dear kinsmen and youthful companions.
So do I declare myself to be thy sister, and thy daughter too, for thou didst lift me to thy breast
when an infant equally with them, as I ever heard from my mother in past days.
But go, bury my kindness in silence, so that I may carry out my promise unknown to my parents;
and at dawn I will bring to Hecate's temple charms to cast a spell upon the bulls.
Poor wretch, must I toss hither and thither in woe?
On every side my heart is in despair;
nor is there any help for my pain; but it burneth ever thus.
Would that I had been slain by the swift shafts of Artemis before I had set eyes on him,
before Chalciope's sons reached the Achaean land.
Some god or some Fury brought them hither for our grief, a cause of many tears.
Let him perish in the contest if it be his lot to die in the field.
For how could I prepare the charms without my parents' knowledge?
What story call I tell them? What trick, what cunning device for aid can I find?
If I see him alone, apart from his comrades, shall I greet him?
Ill-starred that I am!
I cannot hope that I should rest from my sorrows even though he perished;
then will evil come to me when he is bereft of life.
Perish all shame, perish all glow; may he, saved by my effort, go scatheless wherever his heart desires.
But as for me, on the day when he bides the contest in triumph,
may I die either straining my neck in the noose from the roof-tree or tasting drugs destructive of life.
But even so, when I am dead, they will fling out taunts against me;
and every city far away will ring with my doom, and the Colchian women,
tossing my name on their lips hither and thither,
will revile me with unseemly mocking—the maid who cared so much for a stranger that she died,
the maid who disgraced her home and her parents, yielding to a mad passion.
And what disgrace will not be mine? Alas for my infatuation!
Far better would it be for me to forsake life this very night in my chamber by some mysterious fate,
escaping all slanderous reproach, before I complete such nameless dishonour.
Hearken to me. For I deem that I alone can subdue for you that man, whoever he be,
even though his frame be of bronze throughout, unless his life too is everlasting.
But be ready to keep your ship here beyond the cast of his stones, till he yield the victory to me.
I beseech thee, O queen, be gracious and deliver me not to the Colchians to be borne to my father,
if thou thyself too art one of the race of mortals, whose heart rushes swiftly to ruin from light transgressions.
For my firm sense forsook me—it was not for wantonness.
Be witness the sacred light of Helios, be witness the rites of the maiden that wanders by night, daughter of Perses.
Not willingly did I haste from my home with men of an alien race;
but a horrible fear wrought on me to bethink me of flight when I sinned;
other device was there none.
Still my maiden's girdle remains, as in the halls of my father, unstained, untouched.
Pity me, lady, and turn thy lord to mercy;
and may the immortals grant thee a perfect life, and joy, and children, and the glory of a city unravaged!
On your account, ye men of peerless might, and on account of my toils in your ventures am I sorely afflicted;
even I, by whose help ye yoked the bulls, and reaped the deadly harvest of the earthborn men;
even I, through whom on your homeward path ye shall bear to Haemonia the golden fleece.
Lo, here am I, who have lost my country and my parents, who have lost my home and all the delights of life;
to you have I restored your country and your homes;
with eyes of gladness ye will see again your parents;
but from me a heavy-handed god has raft all joy;
and with strangers I wander, an accursed thing.
Fear your covenant and your oaths, fear the Fury that avenges suppliants and the retribution of heaven,
if I fall into Aeetes' hands and am slain with grievous outrage.
To no shrines, no tower of defence, no other refuge do I pay heed, but only to you.
Hard and pitiless in your cruelty!
No reverence have ye for me in your heart though ye see me helpless,
stretching my hands towards the knees of a stranger queen;
yet, when ye longed to seize the fleece, ye would have met all the Colchians face to thee and haughty Aeetes himself;
but now ye have forgotten your courage, now that they are all alone and cut off.
What is this purpose that ye are now devising about me, O son of Aeson?
Has thy triumph utterly cast forgetfulness upon thee, and reekest thou nothing of all that thou spakest when held fast by necessity?
Whither are fled the oaths by Zeus the suppliants' god, whither are fled thy honied promises?
For which in no seemly wise, with shameless will, I have left my country, the glories of my home and even my parents—
things that were dearest to me;
and far away all alone I am borne over the sea with the plaintive kingfishers because of thy trouble,
in order that I might save thy life in fulfilling the contests with the oxen and the earthborn men.
Last of all the fleece—when the matter became known, it was by my folly thou didst win it;
and a foul reproach have I poured on womankind.
Wherefore I say that as thy child, thy bride and thy sister,
I follow thee to the land of Hellas.
Be ready to stand by me to the end, abandon me not left forlorn of thee when thou dost visit the kings.
But only save me; let justice and right, to which we have both agreed, stand firm;
or else do thou at once shear through this neck with the sword, that I may gain the guerdon due to my mad passion.
Poor wretch! if the king, to whom you both commit your cruel covenant, doom me to belong to my brother.
How shall I come to my father's sight?
Will it be with a good name?
What revenge, what heavy calamity shall I not endure in agony for the terrible deeds I have done?
And wilt thou win the return that thy heart desires?
Never may Zeus' bride, the queen of all, in whom thou dost glory, bring that to pass.
Mayst thou some time remember me when thou art racked with anguish;
may the fleece like a dream vanish into the nether darkness on the wings of the wind!
And may my avenging Furies forthwith drive thee from thy country, for all that I have suffered through thy cruelty!
These curses will not be allowed to fall unaccomplished to the ground.
A mighty oath hast thou transgressed, ruthless one;
but not long shalt thou and thy comrades sit at ease casting eyes of mockery upon me,
for all your covenants.
I go, leaving this long tress here in my stead, O mother mine;
take this farewell from me as I go far hence;
farewell Chalciope, and all my home.
Would that the sea, stranger, had dashed thee to pieces, ere thou camest to the Colchian land!
Save me, the hapless one, my friends, from Aeetes, and yourselves too,
for all is brought to light, nor doth any remedy come.
But let us flee upon the ship, before the king mounts his swift chariot.
And I will lull to sleep the guardian serpent and give you the fleece of gold;
but do thou, stranger, amid thy comrades make the gods witness of the vows thou hast taken on thyself for my sake;
and now that I have fled far from my country, make me not a mark for blame and dishonour
for want of kinsmen.
Take heed now, that I may devise help for thee.
When at thy coming my father has given thee the deadly teeth from the dragon's jaws for sowing,
then watch for the time when the night is parted in twain,
then bathe in the stream of the tireless river,
and alone, apart from others, clad in dusky raiment, dig a rounded pit;
and therein slay a ewe, and sacrifice it whole, heaping high the pyre on the very edge of the pit.
And propitiate only-begotten Hecate, daughter of Perses, pouring from a goblet the hive-stored labour of bees.
And then, when thou hast heedfully sought the grace of the goddess,
retreat from the pyre; and let neither the sound of feet drive thee to turn back,
nor the baying of hounds,
lest haply thou shouldst maim all the rites and thyself fail to return duly to thy comrades.
And at dawn steep this charm in water, strip, and anoint thy body therewith as with oil;
and in it there will be boundless prowess and mighty strength,
and thou wilt deem thyself a match not for men but for the immortal gods.
And besides, let thy spear and shield and sword be sprinkled.
Thereupon the spear-heads of the earthborn men shall not pierce thee,
nor the flame of the deadly bulls as it rushes forth resistless.
But such thou shalt be not for long, but for that one day;
still never flinch from the contest.
And I will tell thee besides of yet another help.
As soon as thou hast yoked the strong oxen,
and with thy might and thy prowess hast ploughed all the stubborn fallow,
and now along the furrows the Giants are springing up,
when the serpent's teeth are sown on the dusky clods, if thou markest them uprising in throngs from the fallow,
cast unseen among them a massy stone;
and they over it, like ravening hounds over their food, will slay one another;
and do thou thyself hasten to rush to the battle-strife,
and the fleece thereupon thou shalt bear far away from Aea;
nevertheless, depart wherever thou wilt, or thy pleasure takes thee, when thou hast gone hence.
Friends, verily have I sinned greatly and took no heed not to go among the stranger-folk
who roam over our land.
The whole city is smitten with dismay;
wherefore no one of the women who formerly gathered here day by day has now come hither.
But since we have come and no one else draws near,
come, let us satisfy our souls without stint with soothing song,
and when we have plucked the fair flowers amid the tender grass,
that very hour will we return.
And with many a gift shall ye reach home this very day,
if ye will gladden me with this desire of mine.
For Argus pleads with me, also Chalciope herself; but this that ye hear from me
keep silently in your hearts,
lest the tale reach my father's ears.
As for yon stranger who took on him the task with the oxen,
they bid me receive his gifts and rescue him from the deadly contest.
And I approved their counsel, and I have summoned him to come to my presence
apart from his comrades,
so that we may divide the gifts among ourselves if he bring them in his hands,
and in return may give him a baleful charm.
But when he comes, do ye stand aloof.
Chalciope, as is dear and delightful to thee and thy sons,
even so will I do.
Never may the dawn appear again to my eyes,
never mayst thou see me living any longer,
if I should take thought for anything before thy life or thy sons' lives,
for they are my brothers, my dear kinsmen and youthful companions.
So do I declare myself to be thy sister, and thy daughter too,
for thou didst lift me to thy breast when an infant equally with them,
as I ever heard from my mother in past days.
But go, bury my kindness in silence,
so that I may carry out my promise unknown to my parents;
and at dawn I will bring to Hecate's temple charms to cast a spell upon the bulls.
